GH-493: Clarify Bounding Box Behavior in GeospatialStatistics (#494)
apache/parquet-format: Geospatial.md

indicate the height, or elevation.

M values are an opportunity for a geospatial instance to express a fourth

> dimension as an axis value. These values can be used as a linear reference

Reviewer: What's the purpose of this change?

Author: Thanks. Fixed accordingly.

min/max value pair of coordinates from each axis. Note that X and Y Values are
always present. Z and M are omitted for 2D geospatial instances.

Writers should follow the guidelines below when calculating bounding boxes in
the presence of invalid values. An invalid geospatial value refers to any of 

> the following: `NaN`, `null`, `does not exist` (e.g., LINESTRING EMPTY), or 

Reviewer 2: It seems worth providing concrete example for each case? For example, I still don't understand what does `null` mean here. Is it a null binary value in Parquet, or a null value in WKB? We can add a section below named `Invalid geospatial value` and link it here.

Author: I just created a separate section for `invalid geospatial values`. Please check.

* X and Y: Skip any invalid X or Y value and continue processing the remaining X or Y 

>   values. Do not produce a bounding box if all X or all Y values are invalid.

Reviewer 2: What should we do if a geometry feature has a NaN value in its X coordinate? Should we ignore all the X/Y/Z/M coordinates from it, or just ignore that specific NaN value? It seems reasonable to do the latter.

> * X and Y: Skip any invalid X or Y value and processing the remaining X or Y 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* X and Y: Skip any invalid X or Y value and continue processing the remaining X or Y 
```

  values. Do not produce a bounding box if all X or all Y values are invalid.

* Z: Skip any invalid Z value and continue processing the remaining Z values.
  Omit Z from the bounding box if all Z values are invalid.

* M: Skip any invalid M value and continue processing the remaining M values.
  Omit M from the bounding box if all M values are invalid.

Readers should follow the guidelines below when examining bounding boxes:

> * No bounding box: No assumptions can be made about the presence or absence 

Reviewer 2: We may not make assumption of valid values as well. For example, we cannot think this is an empty bbox.

Author: Resolved. Please check.

  of invalid values. Readers may need to load all individual coordinate 
  values for validation.

* A bounding box is present:

>     * X and Y: X and Y of the bounding box must be present. Readers should 

Reviewer 2: If any X or Y value in the bbox is invalid, the bbox is malformed and cannot be used.

Reviewer 2: ditto for Z and M below

Author: Resolved. Please check.

the presence of edge cases.

* `null` instance: Skip it and continue processing the remaining 
  geospatial instances. Do not produce a bounding box if all instances are null.
* Non-`null` instance with [invalid geospatial values](#invalid-geospatial-values):
  * X and Y: Skip any invalid X or Y value and continue processing the 
    remaining X or Y values. Do not produce a bounding box if all X or all Y 
    values are invalid.

  * Z: Skip any invalid Z value and continue processing the remaining Z values.
    Omit Z from the bounding box if all Z values are invalid.

  * M: Skip any invalid M value and continue processing the remaining M values.
    Omit M from the bounding box if all M values are invalid.

Readers should follow the guidelines below when examining bounding boxes. 
Parquet does not permit `null` or `NaN` values in bounding boxes, whether at 
the overall bounding box level or within individual coordinate fields.

* No bounding box: No assumptions can be made about the presence or validity 
  of coordinate values. Readers may need to load all individual coordinate 
  values for validation.

* A bounding box is present:

>     * X and Y: Both X and Y of the bounding box must be present.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * X and Y: Both X and Y of the bounding box must be present. If any X or Y
      value is invalid, this bounding box is not reliable and cannot be used.
```

Author: I’m hesitant to merge this because I want to avoid mentioning invalid values in the bounding box; otherwise, we would need to create a separate section to define them.

Reviewer 2: The guidelines here is for readers to determine whether a bbox is reliable. So I think `value is present` is not sufficient.

>     * Z: If Z of the bounding box is missing, readers should not assume 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Z: If Z of the bounding box is missing or contains any invalid value, readers should not assume 
```

Author: See above

      anything about the presence or validity of Z values and may need to 
      load individual coordinates for validation.

>     * M: If M of the bounding box is missing, readers should not assume

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * M: If M of the bounding box is missing or contains any invalid value, readers should not assume
```

Author: See above

min/max value pair of coordinates from each axis. Note that X and Y Values are
always present. Z and M are omitted for 2D geospatial instances.

Writers should follow the guidelines below when calculating bounding boxes in
the presence of edge cases.

* `null` instance: Skip it and continue processing the remaining 
  geospatial instances. Do not produce a bounding box if all instances are null.
* Non-`null` instance with [special geospatial values](#special-geospatial-values):

>   * X and Y: Skip any special X or Y value and continue processing the 

Reviewer 3: I have a question here, do we mean:  skip any geospatial instance with special X and Y value

(ie, if a linestring has a thousand coordinates, but only one has bad X,Y value, its enough to skip whole instance?)

Author: no, what we mean is: if a linestring has a thousand coordinates and one has a bad Y value, we skip this single Y value, continue aggregating on other Y values in this linestring instance

Reviewer 3: ok.  sorry i have another confusion in the doc, I know we define special geospatial value for the geospatial instance.  But then in the language we say skip special X or Y value, we dont define what is a special coordinate

Author: Taking a LineString object as an example `LINESTRING (0 NaN, 0 1, 1 2)`:

We have 3 levels here:

1. A geospatial instance: this linestring object
2. A geospatial coordinate:
	* we have 3 geospatial coordinates `0 NaN` , `0 1`, `1 2`
3. A geospatial value:
	* For X, we have `0`, `0`, `1`
	* For Y, we have `NaN`, `1`, `2`

The special geospatial value in this spec refers to the 3rd level. When calculating bbox, we only omitted that single bad value `NaN`, and use X (`0`, `0`, `1`) and Y (`1`, `2`).

That's why we didn't have a definition for `special coordinate` (2nd level) because we look at the 3rd level directly

Reviewer 3: OK sorry i mix levels 2 and 3 in my head (coordinate and value).  

But currently the language of 'special geospatial value' from the link mentions things like 'Nan (point)' , 'empty geometry', and 'invalid WKB' which seems to talk about invalid instances (level 1), which is my confusion.  Then the section talks not about those, but about if actual x,v,z,m values are invalid.  Individual value is invalid only if NaN and outside the range (depending on context), right?

Author: @szehon-ho I think you’re right. The current wording conflated axis values and coordinates. I’ve updated the special geospatial value section to clarify the distinction.

    remaining X or Y values. Do not produce a bounding box if all X or all Y 
    values are special values.

>   * Z: Skip any special Z value and continue processing the remaining Z values.

Reviewer 3: nit: should we just omit 'continue processing the remaining...' in all these sections, to reduce the verbosity , as its a bit obvious?

Author: If you don't have a strong opinion here, I kind of want to keep it verbose. We tend to make it clear that one should only omit individual X/Y/Z/M value and continue using the remaining values, instead of dropping the coordinate or whole geospatial instance.

Reviewer 3: ok i think its fine with me.  For me It'd probably be more helpful if somehow we had that context (talking about continuing with rest of coordinates in an instance), than it is now.  Thinking if we can put this somewhere, but agree not in this line though.

For `GEOGRAPHY` types, X and Y values are restricted to the canonical ranges of
[-180, 180] for X and [-90, 90] for Y.

> When `GeospatialStatistics` is present, writers must omit zmin and zmax if and

Reviewer 2: What about putting these between line 95 and 97?

> When `GeospatialStatistics` is present, writers must omit zmin and zmax if and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To produce `GeospatialStatistics`, writers must omit zmin and zmax if and
```

only if there are zero non-NaN Z values in the column chunk, and must omit mmin

> and mmax if and only if there are zero non-NaN M values. The bounding box must 

Reviewer 2: I think it is better to mention X and Y values first because they are required.

be omitted entirely if and only if there are zero non-NaN X values or zero 
non-NaN Y values in the column chunk. If Z or M values are missing, the writer
may still include a bounding box using only the available dimensions.

Readers may interpret the absence of a bounding box, zmin/zmax, or mmin/mmax as
an indication that all corresponding values are null, and may use this 
information to skip data during predicate evaluation. For example, a reader may
skip a row group if the bounding box is absent, indicating that all X and Y 

> coordinates are null.

Reviewer 2: What is a null value in this case? Is WKB able to encode a null coordinate? I was thinking the binary value is null in this case.

Reviewer 2: > For example, a reader may
skip a row group if the bounding box is absent, indicating that all X and Y 
coordinates are null.

This is counter-intuitive because usually in Parquet we cannot skip the row group if its min/max stats is missing because we cannot make any assumption about its data. It might be the case they all values are null, or the writer does not implement this feature at all.

Reviewer 2: ```thrift
struct ColumnMetaData {
  5: required i64 num_values;
  12: optional Statistics statistics;
}

struct Statistics {
  3: optional i64 null_count;
}
```

I still think that `ColumnMetaData::num_values == ColumnMetaData::statistics.null_count` indicates (implicitly) that the bbox should be empty. We need to fix the implementation of unknown sort order instead of complicating the spec.

Reviewer 4: Would require writing the "empty box" be enough in this case?
Basically:
* If all values are NULL then the null count logic could kick in.
* If there are non-NULL values which are all either empty or "invalid" then write the empty bounding box.

The the intention is that if a bounding box is empty the entire group can be skipped.

The axis order of the coordinates in WKB and bounding box stored in Parquet
follows the de facto standard for axis order in WKB and is therefore always
(x, y) where x is easting or longitude and y is northing or latitude. This

> ordering explicitly overrides the axis order as specified in the CRS.

Author: Fixed by adding back the link break.

follows the de facto standard for axis order in WKB and is therefore always
(x, y) where x is easting or longitude and y is northing or latitude. This
ordering explicitly overrides the axis order as specified in the CRS.

# Invalid geospatial values

An invalid geospatial value refers to any of the following cases:

* `null`: A null value in Parquet.

> * A non-`null` value that are encoded in a valid WKB or bounding box format 

Reviewer 2: Perhaps it is better to distinguish invalid bbox and invalid WKB value?

Reviewer 2: Agreed. Literally `null` is a valid value from the perspective of Parquet and is ignored by all kinds of min/max stats.

  but are not considered valid under this specification, including:
  * `NaN`: Not a Number. For example, `POINT EMPTY` in WKB is represented by a 
    `Point` with each ordinate value set to an IEEE-754 quiet NaN value.

>   * `Empty geometries`: Geometries explicitly marked as empty in WKB using 

Reviewer 2: How to detect `Empty geometries` when collecting the bbox in Parquet? I still don't know what to do if I were to implement this rule.

Author: This is really a WKB reader-specific behavior. I added the following line:

> While different WKB readers may interpret such values differently, the resulting output should be treated as invalid

    indicators such as `numPoints`, `numRings`, or `numGeometries`. Examples 
    include `LINESTRING EMPTY` or `POLYGON EMPTY`.

>   * `Out-of-bounds coordinates`: Values that fall outside the valid range 

Reviewer 2: Are writers encouraged to drop X values when `Out-of-bounds coordinates` has been detected or it is the readers' choice to check this rule? Or both?

Author: I think the writers are required to drop X values when Out-of-bounds coordinates has been detected.

I clarified the readers behavior below

follows the de facto standard for axis order in WKB and is therefore always
(x, y) where x is easting or longitude and y is northing or latitude. This
ordering explicitly overrides the axis order as specified in the CRS.

# Invalid geospatial values

An invalid geospatial value refers to the coordinate values of a non-`null` 

> geospatial instance that are encoded in a valid WKB format, but are not 

Reviewer 2: As we have mentioned `a valid WKB format`, do we need to provide guidelines for `invalid WKB format`?

Author: I think it’s very difficult to enumerate all possible invalid WKB formats, and chasing this could easily become another rabbit hole. Since the WKB standard clearly defines what a valid format is, I suggest we leave this out.

Reviewer 2: Agreed. Is there any well-known reference for this?

Author: I think we already provided references to the WKB standard?

considered valid values under this specification. While different WKB 
readers may interpret such values differently, the resulting output should 
be treated as invalid.

* `NaN`: Not a Number. For example, `POINT EMPTY` in WKB is represented by a 
  `Point` with each ordinate value set to an IEEE-754 quiet NaN value.

> * `Empty geometries`: Geometries explicitly marked as empty in WKB using 

Reviewer 2: I suppose that `LINESTRING EMPTY` or `POLYGON EMPTY` are WKT? Do we have canonical WKB values to demonstrate?

Author: Thanks for catching this. I removed the WKT representation and described the situation in plain English to avoid introducing another standard. I also added WKB examples for clarity.

Author: done

  indicators such as `numPoints`, `numRings`, or `numGeometries`. Examples 
  include `LINESTRING EMPTY` or `POLYGON EMPTY`.

> * `Out-of-bounds coordinates`: Values that fall outside the valid range 

Reviewer 2: Do we need to provide all invalid examples so implementations do not miss anything?

follows the de facto standard for axis order in WKB and is therefore always
(x, y) where x is easting or longitude and y is northing or latitude. This
ordering explicitly overrides the axis order as specified in the CRS.

# Invalid geospatial values

An invalid geospatial value refers to the coordinate values of a non-`null` 
geospatial instance that are encoded in a valid WKB format, but are not 
considered valid values under this specification. While different WKB 
readers may interpret such values differently, the resulting output should 
be treated as invalid.

> 

Author: Done

follows the de facto standard for axis order in WKB and is therefore always
(x, y) where x is easting or longitude and y is northing or latitude. This
ordering explicitly overrides the axis order as specified in the CRS.

# Special geospatial values

A special geospatial value refers to the coordinate values of a 
non-`null` geospatial instance that should be excluded from bounding box 
calculations.

* `NaN`: Not a Number. A `Point` with no X and Y values in WKB is 

>   represented by a `Point` with each ordinate value set to an IEEE-754 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  represented by a `Point` with each coordinate value set to an IEEE-754 
```

# Special geospatial values

A special geospatial value refers to an individual scalar value (e.g., X, Y, Z,
or M) within a coordinate of a non-`null` geospatial instance. These special 
values are excluded from bounding box calculations. For example, in a 
`LineString` instance with XY coordinates `[(1, 2), (NaN, 3), (4, 5)]`, the 
`NaN` value on the X axis will be excluded from the bounding box calculation, 
while all other scalar values will be included.

* `NaN`: Not a Number. A `Point` with no X and Y values in WKB is 
  represented by a `Point` with each scalar value set to an IEEE-754 
  NaN value (e.g., hex: `01 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 f8 7f 00 00 00 00 00 00 f8 7f`).
  NaN values in other geometry types are typically considered invalid 
  geometries by other libraries.
* `Empty geometries`: Geometries explicitly marked as empty in WKB using 
  indicators such as `numPoints`, `numRings`, or `numGeometries`. Examples 
  include `LineString` with no coordinates (hex: `01 02 00 00 00 00 00 00 
  00`) or `Polygon` with no coordinates (hex: `01 03 00 00 00 00 00 00 00`).
* `Out-of-bounds coordinates`: Values that fall outside the valid range 

>   for `GEOGRAPHY` types. For example, `x < -180` or `x > 180`.

Reviewer 2: Should we also mention `y < -90 or y > 90`?

follows the de facto standard for axis order in WKB and is therefore always
(x, y) where x is easting or longitude and y is northing or latitude. This
ordering explicitly overrides the axis order as specified in the CRS.

# Special geospatial values

> A special geospatial value refers to an individual axis value (e.g., X, Y, Z,

Reviewer: Is "axis value" a standard term? Could we use something more clear, like "scalar value" instead?

Author: Thanks. Fixed accordingly.
